Data and Goliath (2015)
Bruce Schneier


== Introduction ==

Cell phone location tracking can infer lots of information. The police can use it.
Popular data brokers are Acxiom, Corelogic, Recorded Future. Sense Networks used
to record lots of cell phone data and make dossiers or profiles to sell. The Ukraine
sent a text to people at a protest indicating that they knew their location.
"Acxiom provides the data foundation for the world's best marketers." 
Verint makes cell tracking systems. Cobham is able to ping a phone without the
user knowing (blind). Defentek claims to be able to locate and track any phone.

One surveillance firm, called Defentek, boasts on its web page that its Infiltrator
Global Real-Time Tracking System can “locate and track any phone number in the world.”
The Infiltrator System is “a strategic solution that infiltrates and is undetected
and unknown by the network, carrier, or the target,” the site says.

GPS is more accurate than cellular. Phone apps use GPS like Angry Birds. HelloSpy
is hidden cell phone app. "The only way to gauge your employees’ loyalty is by monitoring
their cell phones. Employees tend to overuse the work phones assigned to them."

The NSA can track cell phones that are turned off or they can turn on the mic and
listen even to just learn whether in a crowded city street or a quiet room.


== 1. Data as a byproduct of computing ==

Google says give us your data for a bunch of free stuff. Mass surveillance by both
government and coporations. In many ways data is a byproduct of computing. GPS
is accurate to about 16-27 feet while cell towers only 2000 ft.

One can identify a computer by the software it has on it including the version
and what is enabled, etc.

Cars, online, stores, cell phones, photos, EZ-pass, Uber, Nest, IoT and smart
applications, quantified self. 23andMe could sell your markers to an insurance
company in the future. Internet connected devices are expected to number around 30
billion by 2020. We interact unknowingly with hundreds of computers every day.
"Data is the exhaust of the information ago." In 2015, 76 exabytes/year passing through
the internet. 300 petabytes or $300 million for every phone call in US/year. In 2011
Max Schrems sued FB to get all the data they had on him. They sent a 1200-page PDF
document that contained everything he clicked on including his profile information.


== 2. Data as surveillance ==

Snowden revealed that the NSA was recording the metadata for every US phone call.
Metadata is more important than the data for big data projects. A Google search
reveals a tremendous amount about someone. "We know who you are, where you have
been. More or less what you're thinking (before you think it)."

Government and coporations are talking because data gathering is cheap and prevalent.
Lots of spy tools in SkyMall. Spring charges police $30/month for phone location info.

NSA was recording all voice calls in Afhganistan to anticipate improvised explosive
devices.

License plate scanners (ALPR automatic license plate readers) and face recognition. The
plate scanners are used by traffic
cops for repossesion/divorce lawyers to show infidelity/PI's/auto theft. Vigilant
Solutions in Livermore, CA. Also for warrants. They do facial recognition with
350 vectors.

FBI has 52 million faces (2015), some from driver's licenses. Facial recognition was used
at a concert in Boston.


== 3. Analyzing our data ==

Corporations are interested in our data for marketing. By storing lots of data we can
look into the past when a new target appears. NSA stores several databases including
all the phone conversations on Bermuda (MYSTIC). State of New York retains license
plate data for up to five years. This allows them to figure out where people have been.
AT&T hangs on to text messages for 7 years. NSA was doing 3-hop searches but were
told to only do 2-hops on phone metadata for one program.

Google searches all of your Gmail to better advertise toward you.

NSA looks for GPS interactions between the target and everybody else. They check for
tails of their overseas spies. It looks for phones that are turned off but then used
for a brief period and looks for the same behavior amount other phones. It also looks
where people turn their phone off and who else did that. Geofencing is the practice
of delivering ads based on a person's location. Placecast works with Starbucks, Kmart
and others to deliver targeted ads based on geo-loco data.

Mass surveillance is the most powerful when inferences drawn across multiple data sets
are made. Facial recognition will help this. If you buy an subway card with cash and
use it every time you are in NYC, soon there will be only one person who has visited
the city on those days and this can be found out by looking at airline data, etc.

CMU researchers used facial recognition to dynamically load info about people walking
toward the camera on campus using facebook profile images of people who claim to be at CMU.
Initiate Systems correlates data across multiple data sets. They sell to both corporations
and governments. FB is partnering with Acxiom and Epsilon to correlate online profile
with in-store purchases. ExactData provides mailing lists and leads on specific groups
of people who have been flagged for a certain interest or behavior like dating online or
suffer from depression.

Cases where correlating large data sets worked include catching the woman who was having
the affair with the CIA director. She did not email him using her home wifi network but
instead used hotels and other public networks. However, she was the only name that was
using all those networks (from the registration data). The interview subjects of Alfred
Kinsey were 97% identified. Hard to release de-anonymized big data.


== 4. The business of surveillance ==

A smartphone flash light app was sending geolocation data and user information to
advertisers even when people turned the feature off.

Cookie have gotten more advanced. Google analytics is used to track you on sites that use
this service. Blur is an online privacy company that wrote DoNotTrackMe which was a browser
plugin. It keeps your information private. Cookies are also installed into Adobe Flash.
Both FB and Google have relaxed their privacy policies over the years. Google combined
their apps in 2012 to presumably make it easier to create a profile to sell. Apple is one
of the best companies at not selling user data. It could take everything in iCloud if it
decided to.

People voluntarily allow corporations to have their data. We like how our data is used
by Amazon to improve its recommendation engine.

The data brokers have replaced past organizations. They now take all the data they can
get on you and assign you to some category. This is for personalized advertising.

Google controls 2/3 of US search market and FB 3/4 of those on the Internet.

The users are not the customers but the products. The real customers of companies like FB
are who FB sells the data to. People like being able to lose their phone and have their
data transfer to a new phone from the cloud. They like this more than privacy.

We have no say in how these big companies can use our data. It would be hard to live and
not use at least one of these companies.

Aside: From Google privacy statement:
"Our automated systems analyze your content (including emails) to provide you personally
relevant product features, such as customized search results, tailored advertising, and
spam and malware detection.

We may combine personal information from one service with information, including personal
information, from other Google services – for example to make it easier to share things
with people you know. "


== 5. Government surveillance and control ==

NSA has three programs that involve collecting Gmail data. The internet's physical wiring
requires much of the world's traffic to cross US borders, event traffic between two
different countries. NSA: "collect it all", "know it all", "exploit it all". The agency
taps the telcos (telecommunications companies) and cable companies. NSA was recording
all voice calls in Bermuda. NSA budget is thought to $72 million with 33,000 employees
plus contractors.

FBI is a close second to the NSA. The first Snowden leak revealed a document instructing
the FBI to turn over phone records from Verizon customers to the NSA, not the other way
around. StingRay (pg. 68) is discussed and how those involved must sign an NDA.
"Fusion centers" are places where local and federal agencies share data. One is setup
for the Superbowl.

Many countries are surveilling their citizens. Several countries threatened to ban
BlackBerry if the company didn't allow them access to the encrypted data that the devices
generate.

There are many cases of nations hacking other nations. It is never clear if the attack
is government sponsered but one can look at the clues to infer the answer. There have not
been leaks as revealing as the Snowden trove so we don't know as much about other countries.
We know something about China. Italty has a company called Hacking Team that makes cyber-
weapons. Stuxnet was the first military-grade cyberweapon launch by the US and Israel
against Iran.

The Five Eyes is US, UK, Canada, Australia and New Zealand -- english speaking. The Nine
Eyes adds Denmark, France, the Netherlands and Norway. These group share with each other
and stipulate that the data should not be used to spy on their citizens but the NSA
gets around this by using the Danish data to spy on the Germans and the German data to
spy on the Danes.


== 6. Consolidation of instituitional control ==

Snowden revealed that the US government relies on US corporations to eavesdrop on the
Internet. The PRISM program legally compels the major tech companies to hand over their
data. Vodafone hands over all internet traffic flowing into 29 countries. Some US states
sell drivers license photos and voter registration data.

1,931 corporations in the US in 2010 were working on intelligence.

pg. 101

NSA passes racy photos around the office as well as spy on people they know. They also
listen to phone calls of non-Americans overseas. MLK had extramartial affairs and J.
Edgar Hoover wrote him a letting asking him to commit suicide. Mission creep is when
departments or agency go beyond what they are supposed to do because it requires little
effort. An example is the NSA helping out with catching drug smugglers.

Foriegn countries cite US behavior when they make choice about how to surveil their
citizens. Countries like Russia and China are trying to control their citizens when on
the Internet.

Read an article on Wired about surveillance at Superbowl 50. It said they were using
license plate scanners, stingrays or cell phone tower simulators, lots of cameras, and
mabye face recognition technology. The feds don't need a warrant to use the stingrays
but local and state people do.


=== 8. Commercial fairness and equality ==

Corporate mass surveillance. Redlining was the practice only giving loans to people
who lived in certain neighborbood outlined in red on a map. Today a similar online
practice is called weblining which is the use of an e-score to decide who to interact
with a client. Price discrimination versus price gouging. The former is practiced by
airlines, Uber, and restaurants (lunch meal costs different than dinner). Staples online
offers different prices depending on whether a competitor's store is nearby. Similar
for Home Depot. Orbitz presents different options whether the computer is on a Windows
or Mac computer. Corporations are getting more personalized. Lenddo in Panama determines
credit risk by looking at the client's FB friends. "See how Lenddo uses non-traditional data
to provide credit scoring and verification to economically empower the emerging middle class
around the world." High-end restaurants use Internet searches on their clients names to
decide whether to turn the wine menu to the more expensive ones or not.

"Workplace analytics" is the practice of optimizing employees by using FitBit, etc. This
is done with call centers, truck drivers, idea-generating people, etc.

FB could steer an election by selectively showing its users articles and the "I voted"
button from their friends. They did receive criticism during the 2016 election. FB has shown
that they can influence a users mood by either showing them stories with positive or
negative sentiment.

Privacy breaches are common to both government and corporate which means it is not wise
to think that these entities can store whatever they want. Ratting is the use of web cameras
to spy on people and blackmail them.


== 9. Business competitiveness ==

NSA downplayed encryption from 1993 when the internet got started and was void of
e-commerece. The Clipper Chip was a phone encryption system with a backdoor for the govern-
ment to use when needed. It did not sell well. The NSA uses surveillance 1) of US cloud
2) US hardware like Cisco routers and 3) US companies. NSA says "We're only spying on non-
Americans." This is not reassuring for US internet companies who have international clients.
Germany is building their own cloud to avoid the NSA. Germany ruled that FB, Apple and Google
are unlawfully using their citizens data.

There are private social networks (Ello), chat clients (Wickr, secure ephemeral chatting) and
internet search engines (DuckDuckGo). Companies now have people to serve as the Chief Privacy
Officers.


== 10. Privacy ==

Loss of privacy is loss of how we present ourselves. Constant surveillance is unhealthy as
has been shown by prisons and detention centers. The word "collect" to the NSA means to inspect
by a human, not simply store. Algorithmic surveillance can lead to action and therefore is
still a problem. Subjecting people to constant algorithmic surveillance is unhealthy -- if they
are aware of it.

It is hard to identify cyberattacks because don't have multiple streams of data and the time
to investigate. There is work underway to ID everyone on the net (China and Russia).

Seems likely that could id someone in the Witness Protection Program by buying dossiers from
data brokers and scanning for signature items.


== 11. Security ==

As of June 2016, the Terrorist Watch List is estimated to contain over 2,484,442 records,
consisting of 1,877,133 individual identities.

20,000 names on no-fly list. 680,000 people on the watch list. Data mining of mass surveillance
data is not effective. There are many false positives when looking for terrorists. Agencies
talk about "drinking from a fire hose." People plotting terrorist attacks are trying to evade
detection even if they are not informed. Finding terrorists is like looking for a needle in a
haystack. But you need the haystack before you can search for the needle. But there is so much
data it is hard to find the haystack.

The NSA has had little success. The director says that if mass surveillance were being used
before 911 they could have stopped it. This statement comes despite the fact that they were not
able to stop the Boston Marathon bombings.
